---
slug: "vision-for-corvallis-streets"
title: "A Vision For Corvallis' Streets"
date: "2024-10-07"
tags: ["cities"]
description: "How can we make Corvallis' streets safer and more accessible for all? A vision for an improved Corvallis, one street at a time."
---

<Image
  src="/vision-for-corvallis-streets/sw4th.jpg"
  alt="A look down SW 4th street in Corvallis, showing one way of 3 lanes of driving with 2 lanes of parking on either side."
/>

When I first moved to Corvallis, I was extremely excited to join a small city
that consistently [ranks in the top cities for bike mode
share](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_U.S._cities_with_most_bicycle_commuters)
with a bike score rating that earns it the 36th spot among cities (of all
sizes) in the USA. Corvallis must be doing something right to motivate this
level of use, right? After spending a few years here with no car and my bike as
my primary mode of transportation, I think the story is a bit more complicated
than that.

Corvallis is a compact city, meaning that if you can afford to live within the
city limits (which is not a given considering the [median home price of
$526,000](https://www.redfin.com/city/4092/OR/Corvallis/housing-market)), you
are likely not far from any corner of the city. In addition, much of the central
suburbs of Corvallis are quiet, 25 mph roads where kids can play in the street
and biking feels safe. If your commute is primarily within these suburbs – and
many commutes that lead to Oregon State University are – then your bike commute
probably feels comfortable, at least by North American biking standards (you
will still see plenty of high-vis vests though, an indication that not all feel
the safety). These facts, combined with the strong pro-biking culture of the
Pacific Northwest, probably lead to the high ratings of Corvallis on city bike
scores.

However, the high bike mode share in Corvallis happens despite the
infrastructure, not because of it. The best bike infrastructure you are going to
get in Corvallis, on normal commuter routes, are bike gutters and
[sharrows](https://nacto.org/publication/urban-bikeway-design-guide/bikeway-signing-marking/shared-lane-markings/),
sometimes combined with the extremely lofty designation of “neighborhood
bikeway” (which really just means [a sign and pavement markings were
installed](https://www.corvallisoregon.gov/publicworks/page/neighborhood-bikeways)).
Ray Delahanty, producer of the CityNerd YouTube channel, [had this to say about
Corvallis](https://youtu.be/AFDGxK6UbKA?si=bxZyzmElvzyvOvi3&t=224):

> It is a little puzzling because the bike infrastructure isn’t exactly world
> class. It kind of goes to show how important culture and habit are for
> transportation choices.

Though I applaud the culture of the region that leads to
this, it is a shame, really, that bike infrastructure still goes neglected in a
city with such a large bike mode share; think of how many more people could be
encouraged to bike with a little infrastructure investment!

While it would be great if every neighborhood had a dedicated, grade separated
bikeway that followed major travel routes, I think there is some major problem
areas that need addressing first. While there are plenty 35 mph, 5-lane
[stroads](https://www.strongtowns.org/journal/2018/3/1/whats-a-stroad-and-why-does-it-matter)
to be fixed, perhaps none are more alarming and visible than the SW 3rd and SW
4th streets, which are the two separate one-way pieces of the Oregon State Route
99W alignment as it slices through Corvallis’ central business district. If one
wants to bike anywhere in downtown Corvallis, SW 3rd and 4th streets form
massive obstacles, each with 3 lanes of one-way traffic and two lanes of parking
(that makes 10 lanes for one highway in downtown Corvallis), with a 51-foot-wide
traffic area that encourages speeds much higher than the posted 25 mph.

My goal here is to present a new vision for SW 3rd and 4th streets, one that
distributes land use more fairly and accounts for the large amount of
non-vehicular mode share that Corvallis is fortunate enough to have. Further,
this vision will be achievable within the next few years, with few actual
changes to the road surface or alignment itself and for a price that is orders
of magnitude less than what is typically spent on road repair (e.g., [$85.1
million spent on replacing the Van Buren
bridge](https://www.oregon.gov/odot/projects/pages/project-details.aspx?project=20688)).

The first step is to determine the current across-road space utilization. Each
road, SW 3rd and 4th streets, has the same space usage: three one-way travel
lanes with two lanes of curb parking. Based on measurements made on Google Maps,
I believe that each travel lane is 11 feet wide, each parking lane is 9 feet
wide, and each sidewalk is 12 feet wide, bringing the total roadway width to 75
feet (none of which is dedicated to bikers, who, again make up 10% of the
Corvallis mode share). We can view what the current and reimagined streets will
look like using [Streetmix](https://streetmix.net/), a nifty tool for
visualizing road design that I first learned about from a [video about street
redesign from Dave Amos' always-excellent YouTube page City
Beautiful](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1V679pkDl6k). The current state of SW
3rd and 4th streets, as described in this paragraph, is shown here:

<Image
  src="/vision-for-corvallis-streets/sw-3rd4th-st.png"
  alt="A cross-section view of SW 3rd and 4th streets as they currently exist. From left to right: a 12 foot pedestrian zone, a 9 foot parking lane, three 11 foot driving lanes, another 9 foot parking lane, and another 12 foot pedestrian zone."
/>

A cross-section view of SW 3rd and 4th streets as they currently exist. From
left to right: a 12 foot pedestrian zone, a 9 foot parking lane, three 11 foot
driving lanes, another 9 foot parking lane, and another 12 foot pedestrian zone.

This street design prioritizes car traffic over all else, and the experience in
downtown reflects it. Being a pedestrian on these streets is not a good
experience – as the saying goes, cities aren’t loud, cars are loud, and this
street is no exception. Speeds often exceed the posted 25 mph speed limit, as
can be expected for such a wide road. Consider what message this sends to
visitors of downtown: you are expected to arrive in a car, walk (a probably
short distance) to your destination, then return to your car and leave. This,
rather than just being accepted as the status quo, should be viewed as
reinforcing a specific, preferred mode of transportation.

The alternative is a world where all can feel empowered to choose their
preferred mode of transportation. Of course, since so much area has been devoted
to cars it can feel like something is being taken away when changes are
proposed. But I choose this wording to encourage a reframing where, rather than
something being lost by some, something is being gained by all: the freedom to
move how we want. It is not a zero-sum game, and there’s room for us all to
exist and move together.

To that end, taking just one driving lane away from SW 3rd and 4th streets would
go a long way towards providing a more equitable transportation space. The
parking lane would be moved to the previous driving lane and the driving lane
would be replaced with a bike lane, separated from parking and pedestrian
traffic by a curb. An example of what SW 3rd and 4th streets could look like is
shown here:

<Image
  src="/vision-for-corvallis-streets/sw-3rd4th-st-reimagined.png"
  alt="A cross-section view of SW 3rd and 4th streets with an added bike lane. From left to right: a 12 foot pedestrian zone, an 11 foot bike lane with 2 feet of curb on either side, two 11 foot driving lanes, another 9 foot parking lane, and another 12 foot pedestrian zone."
/>

A cross-section view of SW 3rd and 4th streets with an added bike lane. From
left to right: a 12 foot pedestrian zone, an 11 foot bike lane with 2 feet of
curb on either side, two 11 foot driving lanes, another 9 foot parking lane, and
another 12 foot pedestrian zone.

This is a road that all can feel welcome on, despite their transportation
choices. Having such a road greet visitors and residents alike to downtown
Corvallis will show all that they have a safe way to move in the city and go a
long way to showing that good cycling infrastructure is good infrastructure for
all, pedestrians and drivers included.

There are always concerns whenever there are changes from the status quo.
Typical concerns of the installation of bike lanes (ignoring obviously bad faith
talking points) are from business owners worried about how traffic changes will
impact their businesses and from drivers worried about increased traffic due to
losing driving lanes. We need look no further than a very similar city a bit
south for a case study: Davis, California, home of UC Davis (and number one on
the USA bike mode share rankings). In 2016, Davis conducted a road diet on 5th
street, eliminating a driving lane from most of the alignment. This
transformation can be seen on Google street view:

<Image
  src="/vision-for-corvallis-streets/davis-road-diet.png"
  alt="A Google street view image looking east at 401 5th St, Davis, CA. The top image from June 2015 shows four driving lanes with no bike lanes. The bottom image from 2018 shows the newly installed bike lanes with only one lane in each direction and a turn lane."
/>

A Google street view image looking east at 401 5th St, Davis, CA. The top image
from June 2015 shows four driving lanes with no bike lanes. The bottom image
from 2018 shows the newly installed bike lanes with only one lane in each
direction and a turn lane.

A [case study of this road
diet](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/epdf/10.3141/2587-08) found that the
number of bicyclists on 5th street over tripled while actually decreasing
driving times a statistically significant amount. This is a common story with
road diets; resistance from the loudest drivers often assumes that travel times
will increase, while the actual evidence shows that they have little to no
effect on travel times. Similarly, improving bicyclist and pedestrian
infrastructure has been [found in many studies throughout the
USA](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01441647.2021.1912849#abstract)
to have either positive or negligible economic impacts to local businesses.

There are massive benefits and few drawbacks to improving bike infrastructure,
and the suggestion here to do so involves very little spending – it could be as
simple as bolting down some concrete parking dividers just to start. So, the
question, then, is why isn’t anything being done to support the over 10% of
citizens who bike to work (not to mention all the other bike uses)? My opinion
is that there is an over reliance on the public feedback process in street
redesigns and a lack of vision in leadership. Perhaps that is a story for a
future blog, though.

For now, I leave you with a vision for a downtown that would measurably improve
the experience of moving for your neighbors and even, perhaps, for you too.
Freedom is deserved for all and includes the freedom to feel safe while using
your preferred mode of transportation. Street design is a reflection of a city’s
priorities, and shouldn’t it be the case that a top-3 bike city should be
setting the standard for all to follow? If we start to build better bike
infrastructure, Corvallis might even be coming for the top spot, Davis!
